I start my training professionally in
Riga in Latvia when I was eleven years
old then age of 15 I moved to Leningrad
and I was introduced to this famous man
a magician
Alexander Pushkin and this man just made
me as a dancer
nothing special was about him
it was very quiet men father figure for
us it was seven or eight students in
class well obviously it was the best
teacher in the school and he had the
privilege to select the best material
from the or the Lord a Soviet Union he
was no F's teacher his students are
dancing in every big theatre in the
world and I met this man then here I was
15 years old he just looked at me and
said well let's go downstairs and sort
of medical center and see how are you
and I just was what's what your legs
arms and they had about and just look at
me and they did a few steps and it was
just like to selecting a puppy from the
litter you know will crawl away will
crow through who will bark will bite and
then he look at me again and again to
spend a couple of hours just to look at
each other to talk each other not in the
room like that you know and said well I
can dance for you
is it not I didn't need it just it's not
a point that was the point take me the
class and I forgot sake in science that
I'm sweating here does nervous because
it was the chance of my life and I said
well alright I mean I think it's good
deal and then he said to lady the school
secretary whatever she was just I'd like
to have him in my class and I spend with
him three years in the school and three
years in the company we thought he there
he died Misha was accepted into the
Leningrad based Kirov company in 1967
the company school were Pushkin taught
preserved a meticulous classical
approach to the dance that dated back to
the days of it's ours
but it was not only ballet skills that
Mischa learned from Pushkin everyday
what I think was the most amazing and
the most valuable thing what he teach me
besides all this nonsense about
technique and how to dance the just to
respect to the physical work like
everyday routine sometimes boring
routine awfully boring and exhausting
because every day you feel different and
you have a cold someday you have sore
back or some day don't do anything just
sleep but to go in class and try to
convince yourself you like this job you
like this job and if you're not taking
class or you're not sweating enough
you're not working now if you start to
hate yourself you start to really feel
terrible it's a kind of guilt trip if
you're not not spending three four five
hours every day instead here and I think
that that's the secret he introduced me
to the work that's means they end and
explain how you have to work everything
else easy how to do double turn it's not
a problem for any dancer it shouldn't be
any problem I would say I'll put it that
way
[Music]
but to be a master of your own doesn't
matter who is coaching you teaching you
and give you a suggestion to who's your
partner
whose dancers around you have to be a
man of your own mind and know what
you're doing and why you're doing
[Music]
in this man I don't know how and all he
students are very much their own people
they're strong mentally the dance is
something else besides us he was
geniuses just the I was right on what's
good what's bad
in 1969 the eyes of the entire dance
world were on Misha at the age of 21 he
won the gold medal in the international
competition in Moscow he was a celebrity
[Music]
but he began to find the kirov
repertoire rigid and restricting modern
choreographers from the West were out of
bounds
dancers even the stars performed
infrequently and were given few new
parts they had little chance to extend
themselves within the system
in 1961 Rudolf Nureyev had left Russia
in 1970 natalia makarova did the same in
1974 Mikhail Baryshnikov followed their
example
while the kirov company was touring in
Canada he decided to remain in the West